>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 10...
CHINA TAKES NEW STEPS TO
REINVIGORATE ITS INCREASINGLY
SLUGGISH ECONOMY.
THE ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT
STRIKES DOWN A PLAN TO RESCUE
THE STATE'S DEEPLY INDEBTED
PENSION SYSTEM.
WHAT'S NEXT?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM SOUTH AFRICA, ONE MAN'S
PLAN TO CREATE WHAT HE BELIEVES
IS A MORE INCLUSIVE FORM OF
ISLAM.
>> HIS MOSQUE IS OPEN TO
NON-MUSLIMS AND THE WOMEN CAN
PREACH FROM THE PULPIT RIGHT
NEXT TO MEN.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE KLRU IN AUSTIN,
TEXAS, HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FOR THE THIRD TIME IN THE PAST
SIX MONTHS, CHINA'S CENTRAL BANK
HAS SLASHED INTEREST RATES, THIS
IN AN EFFORT TO BOOST GROWTH IN
THE WORLD'S SECOND LARGEST
ECONOMY.
OFFICIALLY, CHINA IS STILL
GROWING AT MORE THAN 7% A YEAR.
BUT LAST YEAR'S GROWTH RATE WAS
THE SLOWEST IN A QUARTER
CENTURY.
THE CENTRAL BANK SAID TODAY,
"CHINA'S ECONOMY IS STILL FACING
RELATIVELY BIG DOWNWARD
PRESSURE."
THE DEATH TOLL FROM THE
EARTHQUAKE IN NEPAL HAS NOW
SURPASSED 8,000.
AND AVALANCHES AND POOR WEATHER
CONDITIONS HAVE FORCED RESCUERS
TO CALL OFF THEIR SEARCH FOR
MISSING HIKERS.
ANOTHER 16,000 PEOPLE WERE
INJURED IN THE MAGNITUDE 7.8
QUAKE AND HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE ARE STILL IN NEED OF
SHELTER.
WE'LL HAVE MORE LATER IN THE
BROADCAST.
THE TALIBAN IN PAKISTAN IS
CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY FOR
SHOOTING DOWN A HELICOPTER
CARRYING FOREIGN DIPLOMATS.
SEVEN PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN THE
INCIDENT FRIDAY, INCLUDING THE
AMBASSADORS TO PAKISTAN FROM THE
PHILIPPINES AND NORWAY.
TODAY, THE MILITANT GROUP POSTED
THIS VIDEO ONLINE, WHICH
APPEARED TO SHOW TALIBAN
FIGHTERS WITH A SURFACE-TO-AIR
MISSILE OF THE KIND IT SAID
BROUGHT DOWN THE CHOPPER.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THE CHOPPER
SUFFERED A MECHANICAL FAILURE.
AND AT THE VATICAN TODAY, A
MEETING BETWEEN THE POPE AND THE
LEADER OF COMMUNIST CUBA, RAUL
CASTRO.
THE TWO MET FOR AN HOUR TO
DISCUSS THE WARMING OF RELATIONS
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND
CUBA, AND THE POPE'S PLANNED
VISIT TO CUBA THIS FALL.
AFTERWARDS, CASTRO, WHO AS A BOY
STUDIED AT JESUIT SCHOOLS,
PRAISED THE PONTIFF AND SAID HIS
COMMUNIST NATION IS EASING ITS
RESTRICTIONS ON RELIGION.
>> I SAID THAT IF THE POPE
CONTINUES TO TALK AS HE DOES,
SOONER OR LATER I WILL START
PRAYING AGAIN AND RETURN TO THE
CATHOLIC CHURCH.
I AM NOT KIDDING.
I AM A COMMUNIST, OF THE CUBAN
COMMUNIST PARTY, AND MY PARTY
DID NOT ALLOW BELIEVERS BUT NOW
IT IS BEING ALLOWED.
IT IS A STEP FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: TWO POLICE
OFFICERS WERE KILLED IN
MISSISSIPPI LAST NIGHT DURING
WHAT AUTHORITIES DESCRIBE AS A
ROUTINE TRAFFIC STOP.
THE TWO WERE TAKEN TO A LOCAL
HOSPITAL WHERE ONE WAS
PRONOUNCED DEAD ON ARRIVAL.
THE OTHER DIED LATER.
A WOMAN AND TWO MEN WHO ARE
BROTHERS WERE ARRESTED EARLY
TODAY.
POLICE HAVE NOT SHARED ANY
MOTIVE FOR THE SHOOTING.
TEN LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS
HAVE BEEN SHOT AND KILLED IN THE
LINE OF DUTY IN THE UNITED
STATES SO FAR THIS YEAR.
TOMORROW IS NATIONAL WOMEN'S
CHECKUP DAY DESIGNED TO
ENCOURAGE PREVENTATIVE CARE.
A RECENT FINDING CONCLUDED THAT
AN ESTIMATED EIGHT MILLION
AMERICAN WOMEN ARE AT GREATER
RISK FOR CERVICAL CANCER BECAUSE
THEY HAVE NOT HAD A PAP SMEAR
TEST DURING THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
FROM BRITAIN TONIGHT, A POSSIBLE
EXPLANATION FOR THE NEGATIVE
HEALTH CONSEQUENCES CAUSED BY
EATING FAST FOOD.
FOR TEN DAYS, A 23-YEAR-OLD IN
ENGLAND WENT ON A DIET
CONSISTING EXCLUSIVELY OF
HAMBURGERS, FRIES, CHICKEN
NUGGETS AND COLA.
AT THE END OF THE EXPERIMENT,
TESTS SHOWED HE HAD LOST MORE
THAN A THIRD OF THE 3,500
MICROBIAL SPECIES IN HIS
STOMACH-- THE BACTERIA THAT
PROTECTS AGAINST OBESITY,
DIABETES, CANCER, HEART DISEASE
AND OTHER DISEASES.
THE STUDY WAS CONDUCTED BY THE
YOUNG MAN'S FATHER, A PROFESSOR
OF GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGY AT KINGS
COLLEGE IN LONDON.
THE DEFENSE DEPARTMENT PAID 14
NFL TEAMS A TOTAL OF MORE THAN
$5 MILLION TO HONOR VETERANS AT
GAMES, EVEN THOUGH THE EVENTS
WERE ROUTINELY PRESENTED TO FANS
AS A GENUINE EXPRESSION OF
THANKS.
THE NATIONAL GUARD, WHICH MADE
ALMOST ALL THE PAYMENTS DURING
THE PAST FOUR YEARS, DEFENDED
THE PRACTICE SAYING THE EVENTS
ARE AN EFFECTIVE RECRUITMENT
TOOL.
CRITICS NOTE THAT THE TEAMS WERE
PAID AT A TIME WHEN THE LEAGUE
WAS CLASSIFIED AS A NON-PROFIT,
MEANING IT DID NOT HAVE TO PAY
FEDERAL TAXES.
THIS MAN HAS CAPTURED THE WORLD
PAPER PLANE THROWING CONTEST.
THE WINNER PRODUCED A PLANE THAT
ONE ACCOUNT SAID WAS PENCIL-THIN
AND FLEW STRAIGHT AS AN ARROW.
IT TRAVELED NEARLY 175 FEET-- OR
58 YARDS.
THE EXUBERANT WINNER CALLED IT A
DREAM COME TRUE.
THERE WAS AN IMPORTANT COURT
RULING ON FRIDAY.
THE ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT VOTED
UNANIMOUSLY TO STRIKE DOWN A LAW
PASSED IN DECEMBER OF 2013 THAT
WAS MEANT TO RESCUE THE STATE'S
PENSION SYSTEM.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE IMPLICATIONS
OF THAT DECISION AND WHAT IT
COULD SIGNAL FOR OTHER STATES,
WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM CHICAGO
BY KAREN PIEROG.
SHE HAS BEEN COVERING THE STORY
FOR REUTERS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO BRING US UP
TO SPEED FOR SOMEONE NOT PAYING
ATTENTION TO WHAT THE LAW WAS IN
2013, WHAT DID IT TRY TO DO?
>> WELL THE LAW WAS AIMED AT
TRYING TO EASE ILLINOIS'S
$105 BILLION UNFUNDED PENSION
LIABILITY, AND ALSO TO LOWER THE
ANNUAL AMOUNT OF MONEY THAT
ILLINOIS HAS TO PAY TOWARDS
PENSIONS EVERY YEAR, AND
ILLINOIS HAS HAD A STRUCTURAL
BUDGET DEFICIT FOR DECADES AND
IT WAS HAVING A VERY HARD TIME
TRYING TO COME UP WITH MONEY,
YOU KNOW, TO PAY FOR CENTRAL
STATE SERVICES.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE TIME
THE LEGISLATURE SAID THIS IS AN
EMERGENCY FISCAL EMERGENCY THEY
NEED TO ACT, IT IS ALMOST LIKE
PUTTING OUT A FIRE.
THEY TOOK CERTAIN STEPS LIKE
INCREASING THE RETIREMENT AGE,
SUSPEND OKAY COST OF LIVING
ADJUSTMENTS SO WHAT DID THE
SUPREME COURT OR WHAT DID THE
STATE COURT SAY TO THOSE
ARGUMENTS?
WHY DID IT FIND IT
UNCONSTITUTIONAL?
>> WELL, THE HIGH COURT
BASICALLY SAID THAT, YOU KNOW,
ILLINOIS KIND OF WAS A --
FABRICATING EMERGENCY, THAT WILL
IT NOISE COULD HAVE DONE THINGS,
IT COULD HAVE RAISED TAXES OR
EXTENDED THE PERIOD FOR THE
PENSIONS AND IT ALSO POINTED OUT
THAT, YOU KNOW, HEY, YOU KNOW,
IT IS AN EMERGENCY FOR THIS
SITUATION, YOU KNOW, WILL THE
STATE CALL EMERGENCIES FOR OTHER
SITUATIONS AND VIOLATE OTHER
PARTS OF THE CONSTITUTION?
>> SO ARE OTHER STATES WATCHING
WHAT HAPPENS AND WHAT HAS BEEN
HAPPENING OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS?
>> WELL, I THINK SO, BUT YOU
HAVE TO LOOK AT EACH STATE'S,
YOU KNOW, SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
ILLINOIS'S CONSTITUTION IS
PRETTY IRONCLAD.
IT SAYS THAT, YOU KNOW, PUBLIC
WORKERS HAVE A CONTRACTUAL RIGHT
AND THEIR PENSION BENEFITS
CANNOT BE IMPAIRED OR
DIMINISHED.
>> AND ONE OF THE ONLY OTHER
STATES THAT HAS THE EXACT SAME
WORDING IS NEW YORK STATE, AND
ACTUALLY ILLINOIS COPIED ITS
WORDING FROM NEW YORK AND NEW
YORK HAS DEALT WITH ITS PROBLEMS
BY SETTING UP DIFFERENT TIERS
FOR PENSIONS, SO, YOU KNOW, IN A
PARTICULAR YEAR NEW HIRES WILL
GET, YOU KNOW, A LESS GENEROUS
PENSION AS TIME GOES ON.
>> Sreenivasan: SO PUT THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE.
HOW BAD IS ILLINOIS'S PENSION
PROBLEM COMPARED TO OTHER STATES
IN THE COUNTRY?
>> ILLINOIS, ILLINOIS PENSIONS
ARE ONLY ABOUT 43 PERCENT FUNDED
SO COMPARED TO ALL THE OTHER
STATES IT HAS THE WORST FUNDED
PENSION SYSTEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE
SOME OTHER STATES THAT HAVE
PENSION PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, NEW JERSEY, YOU KNOW,
ITS PENSIONS ARE ONLY 44 PERCENT
FUNDED AND THAT IS A SUBJECT OF
LITIGATION RIGHT NOW, BECAUSE
WHILE THE EMPLOYEES, YOU KNOW,
TOOK CUTS AND, YOU KNOW, HIGHER
RETIREMENT AGES, GOVERNOR
CHRISTIE DID NOT -- DID NOT LIVE
UP TO HIS SIDE OF THE BARGAIN
AND DID NOT MAKE FULL PENSION
PAYMENTS AS REQUIRED.
THAT IS IMPORTANT.
IN CALIFORNIA, BACK IN 2012,
THEY DID PASS, YOU KNOW, SOME
INITIAL PENSION REFORMS AND NOW
THE FORMER MAYOR OF SAN JOSE IS
TRYING TO PUT IN AN INITIATIVE
ON THE BALLOT THAT WOULD MAKE
FURTHER REFORMS TO PENSIONS IN
THAT STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES
ILLINOIS PLAN TO DO NOW THE
COURTS HAVE WEIGHED IN?
>> WELL, WE HAVE A NEW GOVERNOR
HERE IN ILLINOIS WHO, YOU KNOW,
IS AN UNTESTED POLITICIAN, IT IS
HIS FIRST, YOU KNOW, TERM IN
GOVERNMENT.
HE WAS A VENTURE CAPITALIST, AND
HE WANTS TO PUT FORTH HIS OWN
PLAN, WHICH WOULD BE TO FREEZE
THE CURRENT WORKERS BENEFITS
WHERE THEY ARE RIGHT NOW AND
THEN MOVE THEM GOING FORWARD
INTO THE LESS GENEROUS PENSION
PLAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
KAREN PIEROG, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
OUR ORIGINAL IN-DEPTH REPORTS
FROM AROUND THE NATION AND
AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO SOUTH
AFRICA, WHERE ONE MAN IS ON A
CAMPAIGN TO MAKE ISLAM MORE
INCLUSIVE TOWARD WOMEN AND GAYS.
HIS OUTSPOKENNESS HAS PROVOKED
CONTROVERSY AND EVEN VIOLENCE--
THREE SUSPECTED ACTS OF ARSON.
BUT HE DOES HAVE HIS FOLLOWERS.
AND, AS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN SEEMUNGAL
REPORTS, A SMALL NUMBER OF
MUSLIMS AROUND THE WORLD ARE
TAKING SIMILAR STEPS.
>> Reporter: THE CALL TO PRAYER
AT CAPE TOWN'S NEWEST MOSQUE,
WHICH ADVERTISES ITSELF AS ONE
OF A KIND IN SOUTH AFRICA.
>> WE ARE THE ONLY MOSQUE BY THE
WAY IN THE WHOLE COUNTRY THAT
HAS THE WORDS ALL WELCOME.
WE CHOSE THE NAME OPEN MOSQUE TO
REALLY IDENTIFY WHAT THE MOSQUE
WAS ABOUT, IT WAS OPEN TO ALL.
>> Reporter: 60 YEAR OLD TAJ
HARGEY IS THE MAN BEHIND THIS
NEW MOSQUE-- A MOSQUE HE SEES
WORTHY OF BEING REPLICATED IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
HARGEY SAYS HIS MOSQUE IS OPEN
TO NON-MUSLIMS, HOMOSEXUALS---
WOMEN ARE ALLOWED TO PREACH FROM
THE PULPIT.
THEY PRAY SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE
MEN.
TANWEER IS ONE OF THE FEW WHO
PRAYS HERE REGULARLY EVER SINCE
THE MOSQUE OPENED LAST
SEPTEMBER.
>> I COME TO THIS MOSQUE EVERY
WEEK BECAUSE THIS IS THE ONLY
MOSQUE THAT I KNOW OF WHERE
THERE'S EQUALITY IN THE GENDERS,
WHERE FEMALES SIT AND CAN
ACTUALLY VIEW THE SERMON FROM
THE FRONT AND WE'RE CONSIDERED
EQUALS TO MEN.
>> Reporter: A COUNTER, HE SAYS,
TO THE DAILY STREAM OF NEWS AND
IMAGES THAT PORTRAY ISLAM AS
EXTREMIST AND VIOLENT.
IN FACT, HARGEY HAS BEEN
CHALLENGING MUSLIM ORTHODOXY FOR
YEARS.
BORN AND RAISED IN CAPE TOWN,
HARGEY WENT ABROAD AND STUDIED
AT OXFORD.
HE HAS A PHD IN RELIGIOUS
STUDIES.
HE MADE HEADLINES IN BRITAIN
LAST YEAR BECAUSE OF HIS "BAN
THE BURQA" CAMPAIGN.
>> THIS IDEA OF FACE MASKING, IF
ITS AN ISLAMIC PRACTICE.
WHY IS IT BANNED IN MECCA?
NO WOMAN WHICH GOES TO MECCA,
THE HOLIEST MOSQUE IN ISLAM, IS
ALLOWED TO COVER HER FACE-- SO
THIS NOTION THAT IS AN ISLAMIC
PRACTICE WITH DUE RESPECT IS
NONSENSE.
IT MAY BE A CULTURAL EXPRESSION
FINE.
IT MAY BE A PERSONAL WISH.
IF I WANT TO PUT A BONE THROUGH
MY NOSE I HAVE A RIGHT.
BUT THEN DO I HAVE A RIGHT TO
SAY A BONE THROUGH MY NOSE IS AN
ISLAMIC THING?
>> IT THINK THE FIRST REACTION
FROM THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY WAS
ONE OF SURPRISE, OF ASTONISHMENT
AND THEN I THINK A CERTAIN
AMOUNT OF ANGER.
>> Reporter: SHAFIQ MORTON IS A
JOURNALIST AND A CONVERT TO
ISLAM.
>> THERE WAS A FEELING OF INSULT
AND HURT AS WELL THAT SOMEBODY
COULD COME IN AND MAKE THESE
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE STATE OF
THE COMMUNITY AND MAKE THESE
CLAIMS THAT THE COMMUNITY WASN'T
OPEN, THAT IT WASN'T WELCOMING
AND THAT IT WAS A CLOSED
COMMUNITY, THAT IT WAS ULTRA-
CONSERVATIVE IN THE NEGATIVE
SENSE.
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S NOT JUST
HARGEY SEEKING AN ALTERNATIVE TO
CONSERVATIVE ISLAM.
THE IDEA HAS CAUGHT ON IN SMALL
NUMBERS IN PLACES LIKE CANADA TO
PARIS TO LOS ANGELES WHERE
MOSQUES HAVE OPENED UP SEEKING
TO CATER TO WOMEN OR GAY PEOPLE.
>> I THINK WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS
AN ATTEMPT TO REALLY GO BACK TO
DEBATES THAT HAVE EXISTED IN
EARLY MUSLIM TRADITIONS AND TRY
TO BRING THOSE TRADITIONS BACK
TO THE FRONT.
>> Reporter: HUSSEIN RASHID IS A
PROFESSOR OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES
AT HOFSTRA UNIVERSITY ON LONG
ISLAND.
>> WHEN WE LOOK AT THESE NEW
CENTERS COMING UP, I THINK WE
HAVE TO SEE IT NOT AS A TREND
TOWARDS WE'RE GONNA HAVE GAY
MOSQUES OR A TREND TOWARDS
HAVING WOMEN'S MOSQUES, BUT
REALLY IT'S A PATTERN OF MUSLIMS
ARE NOW REIMAGINING WHAT THESE
SPACES COULD BE LIKE MORE
LARGELY.
AND SO IT'S IMPORTANT BECAUSE
IT'S NOT THE TRANSFORMATION OF
THE TRADITION BUT IT IS THE
ADAPTATION OF THE TRADITION.
>> Reporter: EVEN SO HARGEY'S
INTERPRETATION OF ISLAM HAS PUT
HIM AT ODDS WITH THE MAINSTREAM
MUSLIM COMMUNITY HERE,
ESTABLISHED NEARLY 400 YEARS AGO
BY SLAVES FROM THE DUTCH EAST
INDIES-- PRESENT DAY INDONESIA.
MUSLIMS NOW ACCOUNT FOR 1.5
PERCENT OF SOUTH AFRICA'S
POPULATION.
HARGEY'S CALL FOR A REVOLUTION
ON HOW ISLAM IS PRACTICED HAS
MADE HIM A TARGET-- LAST YEAR
THERE WERE THREE ARSON ATTACKS
AGAINST THE MOSQUE.
HIS THEOLOGY IS A SHARP
DEPARTURE FROM MAINSTREAM ISLAM-
- A FEW MILES AWAY AT THE LARGE
GATESVILLE MOSQUE WOMEN PRAY
FROM THE BALCONY AT THE BACK OF
THE MOSQUE AND ARE SEPARATED BY
A BARRIER.
MAINSTREAM MUSLIMS SAY IT HAS
BEEN THIS WAY FOR CENTURIES AND
THEY ARE AGAINST WHAT HARGEY IS
DOING.
>> HE DOESN'T REPRESENT ISLAM
WHAT HIS TEACHING AND HIS
PHILOSOPHY IS TOTALLY AT
VARIANCE WITH ISLAMIC
PHILOSOPHY.
COMPLETELY AT VARIANCE.
>> I WOULD SAY HE'S A HERETIC
AND WE WILL LEAVE HIM TO HIS OWN
DEVICES.
YEAH, HE'S AN IMPOSTER.
>> Reporter: SOME PEOPLE ARE
CALLING YOU AN IMPOSTER, EVEN A
HERETIC?
>> I AM NOT A HERETIC.
THEY HAVE VERY LITTLE GROUNDS
THEOLOGICALLY AND OTHERWISE TO
CONDEMN THIS MOSQUE.
WHAT THEY ARE DOING IS SCRAPING
THE BOTTOM OF THE BARREL.
THEY ARE ISSUING TENDENTIOUS
LEAFLETS ANONYMOUS AND SO FORTH
SAYING I AM GAY BECAUSE HARGEY-
MEANS THE GAY PART OF MY NAME,
I'M GAY-- NONSENSE LIKE THAT.
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH HARGEY'S
POSITION ON HOMOSEXUALITY HAS
BEEN QUESTIONED, SO WE ASKED HIM
FOR A CLARIFICATION.
>> WELL, I DON'T ENDORSE
HOMOSEXUAL LIVING.
I THINK THIS IS NOT WHAT THE
KORAN TEACHES, BUT LIKE I'VE
SAID EARLIER, I DO NOT HAVE THE
RIGHT TO CONDEMN PEOPLE.
IT IS NOT OUR BUSINESS TO DECIDE
WHO ENTERS THIS MOSQUE OR NOT.
AND THE KORAN IS VERY SPECIFIC
THAT JUDGMENT BELONGS TO GOD
ALONE.
SO IF THE HOMOSEXUAL OR THE
LESBIAN COMES IN KNOWN TO ME OR
UNKNOWN TO ME WE DON'T HAVE THE
RIGHT TO EXCLUDE THEM FROM THIS
GATHERING.
>> Reporter: FOR ALL THEIR
DIFFERENCES, HARGEY AND THE LONG
ESTABLISHED GATESVILLE MOSQUE
ARE ACTUALLY NOT THAT FAR APART.
THE IMAM OF THAT MOSQUE, SHEIK
ALEXANDER, SAYS NOBODY IS ASKED
ABOUT THEIR SEXUAL ORIENTATION
WHEN THEY COME TO PRAY.
>> EVEN THOUGH HOMOSEXUALITY IS
CONDEMNED IN ISLAM, MY HEART AND
MY ARMS ARE OPENED TO THOSE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE A DIFFERENT
SEXUAL ORIENTATION ALWAYS
ENCOURAGING THEM TO COME BACK TO
GOD ALMIGHTY BUT THE MOSQUE IS
STILL OPEN FOR THEM BECAUSE THEY
ARE STILL HUMAN BEINGS.
>> Reporter: AND HARGEY'S
CRITICS SAY IT IS IMPLIED THAT
ALL MOSQUES ARE "OPEN" IN ONE
FASHION OR ANOTHER.
FOR EXAMPLE THIS MOSQUE IN THE
CAPE TOWN SUBURB OF CLAREMONT
HAS OPERATED WITH "OPEN"
PRACTICES FOR YEARS.
>> THE SPACE IS EFFECTIVELY, IF
YOU WALK INTO THE ROOM, THERE
ARE WOMEN ON THE RIGHT SIDE AND
MEN ON THE LEFT SIDE.
AND THERE'S A NARROW ROPE.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, WHEN MY HUSBAND
AND I GO THERE MY HUSBAND SITS
THERE, WE SIT NEXT TO EACH OTHER
EFFECTIVELY.
AND WHEN I SAY ROPE IT'S A THIN
ROPE AND OUR KIDS CAN PLAY IN
BETWEEN.
>> Reporter: RASHID SAYS IN THE
SOUTH AFRICA MOSQUE AND OTHERS
LIKE IT PEOPLE ARE REACTING TO
WHAT HE CALLS A "CULTURE OF
EXCLUSION" IN THE CENTERS THEY
BELONG TO.
>> SO IT'S ONE THING TO SAY, "OF
COURSE, WE'RE OPEN.
WE DON'T DO A CHECK IF YOU'RE
GAY."
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, THERE'S A
CULTURE OF WHERE ARE WOMEN
LOCATED IN A MOSQUE-- HOW DO
YOUR SERMONS TALK ABOUT
DIFFERENT PEOPLE WHO ARE GAY OR
PEOPLE OF A DIFFERENT ETHNICITY?
>> Reporter: CONSERVATIVE
MUSLIMS IN CAPE TOWN DON'T THINK
HARGEY IS GOING TO GET MANY
FOLLOWERS AT HIS MOSQUE.
THE TURNOUTS AT HARGEY'S MOSQUE
HAVE BEEN SMALL.
>> BECAUSE THEY HAVE BEEN
INTIMIDATED AND FRIGHTENED INTO
NOT COMING.
PEOPLE ARE AFRAID FOR THEIR
LIVES.
>> Reporter: THE ARSON ATTACKS
LATE LAST YEAR ARE STILL UNDER
INVESTIGATION-- CAPE TOWN'S
MUSLIM JUDICIAL COUNCIL DECLINED
TO COMMENT ON HARGEY'S MOSQUE.
HOWEVER, ITS LEADERS HAVE URGED
TOLERANCE AND CONDEMNED THE ACTS
OF VIOLENCE.
TAJ HARGEY'S CLAIMS AND APPROACH
HAVE STIRRED UP CONTROVERSY--
BUT THEY HAVE ALSO STRUCK A
NERVE IN THE ISLAMIC COMMUNITY
ESPECIALLY ON THE ISSUE OF
GENDER EQUALITY.
>> I LIKE THE FACT THAT WE'VE
STARTED CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
THIS.
I LIKE THE FACT THAT PEOPLE ARE
FALLING OVER THEMSELVES TO CLAIM
OPENNESS WHEN IN REALITY THERE
ARE A NUMBER OF MOSQUES THAT
SIMPLY DON'T HAVE SPACES FOR
WOMEN.
>> Reporter: AND HARGEY, HE SAYS
HE'S NOT AFRAID OF ALL THOSE
CRITICS.
>> IF THEY THOUGHT THAT SOMEHOW
WE WOULD SHUT UP SHOP AND
SOMEHOW WE'LL DISAPPEAR, THEY
HAVE ANOTHER THING COMING.
EVEN IF WE JUST HAVE TWO OR
THREE PEOPLE HERE THIS MOSQUE
WILL NOT CLOSE.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE REPORTED,
THE DEATH TOLL FROM THE
EARTHQUAKE IN NEPAL HAS NOW
SURPASSED 8,000.
PAMELA CONSTABLE OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST" JUST RETURNED
FROM THAT COUNTRY AND JOINS US
NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
WHAT IS THE STATE OF AFFAIRS ON
THE GROUND THERE NOW?
WE SEE PICTURES OF HELICOPTERS
TRYING TO DELIVER AID.
ARE PEOPLE GETTING IT?
>> YES AND NO.
IT DEPENDS VERY MUCH WHERE THEY
ARE.
I WOULD SAY THAT AID IS
CERTAINLY BEGINNING TO REACH
MUCH OF THE COUNTRY, INCLUDING
SOME OF THE WORST AFFECTED
AREAS, BUT STILL YET TO REACH
SOME OF THE MORE REMOTE
MOUNTAINOUS AREAS TO THE NORTH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THERE ARE
STILL CONTINUING REPORTS OF
LANDSLIDES AND MAYBE SMALL
AFTERSHOCKS THAT CAUSED THEM.
WHAT KIND OF AN EFFECT DOES IT
HAVE ON THE PEOPLE TRYING TO GET
WITH BY AND RECOVER FROM THIS?
>> IT HAS MINUTE EFFECTS ONE OF
COURSE WHICH IS PSYCHOLOGICAL
BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE, IN FACT, THE
NEPALESE PEOPLE HAVE AMAZINGLY
THE RESILIENT AND RESOURCEFUL
AND ACCEPTING WAYS OF DEALING
WITH THESE THINGS ABLE, I AM
INCREDIBLY IMPRESSED WITH
EVERYONE I MET, EVEN THE WORST
AFFECTED AREAS, BUT JUST WHEN
YOU THINK IT IS OVER TO HAVE
ANOTHER LANDSLIDE, TO HAVE
ANOTHER BUILDING FALL, IT CAN
BE, I THINK, DEPRESSING AND HARD
ON PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING THEIR
BEST TO SORT OF START OVER
AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, YOU TOOK
SOME PHOTOGRAPHS WHILE YOU WERE
THERE, WHAT ABOUT THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE BEING SHELTERED?
>> THE PICTURES THAT ACCOMPANIED
MY STORIES WERE ALL TAKEN BY
MATT MCLEAN, PHOTOGRAPHER THAT
WORKED VERY CLOSELY ON THIS
TOGETHER.
PITCHING TENTS IN THE CITY, THAT
WAS QUITE AN EXPERIENCE TO SEE
HOW PEOPLE WERE REALLY
SCRAMBLING, SCROUNGING, FINDING
IS A ADVANTAGED BITS OF PLASTIC
AND WOOD AND BRICK AND METAL AND
MAKING THESE AMAZING SHELTERS
FOR THEMSELVES, AGAIN,
INCREDIBLY IMPRESSIVE.
BUT MANY, MANY PLACES,
ESPECIALLY IN RURAL AREAS,
PEOPLE ARE STILL LITERALLY
SLEEPING OUTDOORS ON THE GROUND
AROUND THEIR RELATIVES, AFRAID
TO GO BACK TO THE DWELLINGS THAT
HAVE COLLAPSED.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SO THERE
WAS ALSO ANOTHER PICTURE THAT
WAS INTERESTING, IT WAS OF
SOMEONE BURNING A FUNERAL FIRE.
I MEAN, IT WAS SOMETHING YOU
DON'T THINK OF, WHAT HAS TO
HAPPEN TO ALL OF THE BODIES
AFTER THE FACT.
>> YES.
AND THE CULTURE IN NEPAL WHICH
IS BUDDHIST AND HINDU, YOU KNOW,
THEY DO HAVE THESE CEREMONIES
WHERE THEY PUT THE BODIES ON
BURNING FIRES AND THEY USUALLY
COVER THEM WITH FLOWERS AND THEN
BURN THEM.
AND FOR THE FIRST SEVERAL DAYS
AFTER THE QUAKE THE MAIN PLACE
FOR, WHERE THAT IS DONE IN
KATHMANDU CAUSE PARK PATI IT WAS
AN ASSEMBLY LINE, IT WAS VERY,
VERY DEPRESSING TO SEE.
WAITING LINES FOR PEOPLE TO BE
CREMATED BY THE RIVER.
IT SLOWED DOWN NOW BUT THAT IS
ONLY IN THE CAPITAL.
MOST OF THE VICTIMS, IF YOU ADD
UP THE TOTALS WERE IN RURAL
AREAS AND IT IS HARDER TO KNOW
WHAT HAS HAPPENED THERE WITH THE
BODIES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HAS THE
WEATHER THERE IMPROVED RIGHT NOW
OR WHAT IS IT LIKE IF PEOPLE ARE
SLEEPING OUTDOORS IN TENTS?
>> IT IS MUCH BETTER.
THE FIRST COUPLE OF DAYS AFTER
THE QUAKE THERE WAS A LOT OF
RAIN AND MUD AND IT WAS VERY
UNCOMFORTABLE, BUT EVERYWHERE WE
WENT OVER THE PAST SEVERAL DAYS,
THE.
BOTH RURAL AREAS AND IN THE
CAPITAL IT WAS MUCH NICER.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT IS THE
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE BEEN LIKE?
>> IT HAS BEEN VERY MIXED.
I HAVE SEEN POLICE AND ARMY
EVERYWHERE WE HAVE BEEN.
THEY HAVE BEEN INCREDIBLY
PROFESSIONAL AND HELPFUL.
REALLY HAVE, HELPED NOT ONLY
SECURE BUT RESCUING PEOPLE,
FINDING PEOPLE AND RESCUING
THEM, ONE CASE WHERE THEY
ACTUALLY BROUGHT A SOLAR PANEL
TO A CAMP SO PEOPLE COULD CHARGE
THEIR CELLPHONES, VERY
PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE,
ESPECIALLY BY THE POLICE.
THE CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT IS
REALLY, HAS REALLY NOT DONE VERY
WELL.
THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF CHAOS, A
LOT OF EXTRA RULES WERE PUT IN
PLACE FOR CUSTOMS TO BRING IN
AID, A LOT OF AID WAS REALLY
BLOCKED AT THE MAIN AIRPORT FOR
A LONG TIME, THERE WAS
INFIGHTING GOING ON BETWEEN
POLITICAL PARTIES DURING THIS
WHOLE DISASTER.
IT IS A LITTLE BETTER NOW BUT I
THINK MANY PEOPLE, NEPALIS HAVE
EXPRESSED A LOT OF
DISAPPOINTMENT IN THE
POLITICIANS AND THE CIVILIAN
LEADERSHIP DURING THIS CRISIS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
PAMELA OF THE WASHINGTON POST,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU ARE VERY WELCOME.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE
INFORMATION ABOUT HOW TO HELP
VICTIMS OF THE EARTHQUAKE IN
NEPAL, VISIT US ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
HERE IN TEXAS, SONGWRITERS AND
MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY ARE
TEAMING UP, CRAFTING MUSIC
TOGETHER TO HELP THE SERVICEMEN
AND WOMEN BETTER COPE WITH THEIR
EXPERIENCES.
SOME OF THOSE IN THE PROGRAM
SPOKE TO DIRECTOR MARIO TRONCOSO
OF KLRU FOR THE UPCOMING
DOCUMENTARY "IN THEIR WORDS."
>> SONGWRITING WITH SOLDIERS TO
ME IS THIS INCREDIBLY BEAUTIFUL,
KIND OF EVOLUTION YOU MIGHT SAY
OF WHAT I'VE ALWAYS WANTED TO
DO, WHICH IS TELL STORIES AND
WRITE SONGS.
>> ONE OF THE MOST WONDERFUL
THINGS ABOUT MUSIC IS A GREAT
SONG LETS YOU KNOW YOU ARE NOT
ALONE.
♪
>> MY PURPOSE HERE TODAY IS TO
SPREAD A MESSAGE OF HOPE AND
INSPIRATION FOR OTHER SOLDIERS
THAT ARE SUFFERING FROM PTSD,
HELP UNDERSTANDING AS FAR AS
WHAT'S HAPPENING THAT IT'S OKAY.
>> AND WHAT WE FOUND WAS THE
COLLABORATION PROCESS WITH
SONGS, IN PARTICULAR, IS VERY
CATHARTIC.
IT MAKES THEM FEEL BETTER.
IT RELEASES SOMETHING.
IT ALLOWS PEOPLE TO STEP ACROSS
A BORDER THAT THEY DIDN'T KNOW
WAS THERE.
>> WE'RE LOSING 22 VETERANS A
DAY TO SUICIDE.
A DAY.
I GUARANTEE YOU THEY'VE SAVED
LIVES WITH THIS PROGRAM.
>> I'VE THOUGHT ABOUT GIVING UP.
I'VE THOUGHT ABOUT HURTING
MYSELF.
I'VE THOUGHT ABOUT THROWING IN
THE TOWEL.
IT'S JUST SOMETHING ABOUT MUSIC.
IT CHANGES EVERYTHING.
>> I FEEL INCREDIBLY LUCKY TO
HAVE FOUND THIS NEW WAY OF
WRITING SONGS THAT'S USING THE
CRAFT OF SONGWRITING IN SERVICE
OF SOMEONE ELSE.
♪
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT:
A TORNADO TOUCHED DOWN IN
TEXAS.
THERE WERE REPORTS OF DAMAGE
BUT NO REPORTS OF DEATHS.
THOUSANDS OF GALLONS OF OIL
SPILLED INTO THE HUDSON RIVER
AFTER A FIRE LAST NIGHT AT A
NUCLEAR POWER PLANT NEAR NEW
YORK CITY AND FORMER PRESIDENT
JIMMY CARTER TOOK ILL IN SOUTH
AMERICA TODAY.
HE UNEXPECTEDLY RETURNED TO
ATLANTA.
FIGHTING NUT ALLERGIES BY EATING
NUTS.
>> PARKER ANDERSON HAS BEEN
ALLERGIC TO PEANUTS AND TREE
NUTS SINCE SHE WAS A TODDLER.
SHE'S COME TO STANFORD
UNIVERSITY TO ENROLL IN A FIRST-
OF-ITS-KIND CLINICAL TRIAL IN
THE HOPES THAT SHE MAY ONE DAY
BE ABLE TO EAT NUTS...
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S IT FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
A SPECIAL THANK YOU TO OUR
FRIENDS HERE AT KLRU IN AUSTIN.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.